NBCA-201: DATA STRUCTURE
LTP: 3 1 0


Course Code: NBCA-201 


Course Outcomes (COs)
After the completion of the course, students are expected to have the ability to: 

Represent arrays, linked lists, stacks, and queues in memory using algorithms and their common applications. 

Understand recursion concepts, its applications, implementation, and removal. 

Analyze the computational efficiency of sorting and searching algorithms. 

Implement Trees and Graphs, including various operations on these structures. 

Identify alternative implementations of data structures based on performance for real-world problems. 

Unit-wise Syllabus
Unit-I: Introduction & Linear Structures (07 Hours)

Introduction: Basic Terminology, Elementary Data Organization, Built-in Data Types, and Abstract Data Types. 


Arrays: Derivation of Index Formulae for 1D, 2D, 3D & nD Arrays; Application of arrays. 


Linked Lists: Implementation of Singly Linked List and Doubly Linked List. 

Unit-II: Stacks & Queues (08 Hours)

Stacks: Basic operations (Push & Pop), Array implementation in C, Applications: Prefix and Postfix Expressions, and Evaluation of postfix expressions. 



Queues: Basic operations (Create, Add, Delete), Circular queues, and Array implementation in C. 

Unit-III: Trees (09 Hours)

Basics: Basic terminology, Binary Trees, and Binary Tree Representation (Array and Pointer/Linked List). 



Types: Binary Search Tree, Strictly Binary Tree, and Complete Binary Tree. 


Operations: Extended Binary Trees, Tree Traversal algorithms (In-order, Pre-order, Post-order), and constructing Binary Trees from traversals and insertions. 

Unit-IV: Searching & Sorting (08 Hours)

Searching: Sequential search and Binary Search. 



Sorting: Insertion Sort, Selection Sort, Bubble Sort, Quick Sort, and Radix Sort. 

Unit-V: Graphs (08 Hours)

Basics: Basic terminology and Graph Representations (Adjacency Matrices, Adjacency List). 



Traversal: Depth First Search (DFS) and Breadth First Search (BFS). 


Advanced Topics: Connected Components, Spanning Trees, and Minimum Cost Spanning Trees (Prim’s and Kruskal’s algorithms). 

Text & Reference Books

Text Books: 

Aaron M. Tenenbaum, Yedidyah Langsam, and Moshe J. Augenstein, "Data Structures Using C and C++", PHI. 

R. Kruse et al., "Data Structures and Program Design in C", Pearson Education. 

Thareja, "Data Structure Using C", Oxford Higher Education. 


Reference Books: 

Horowitz and Sahani, "Fundamentals of Data Structures", Galgotia Publication. 

Lipschutz, "Data Structures", Schaum's Outline Series, TMH. 

NBCA-206P: DATA STRUCTURE LAB

LTP: 0 0 3 


List of Experiments
Addition and multiplication of two 2D arrays. 

Transpose of a 2D array. 

Implement stack using an array. 

Implement stack using a linked list. 

Implement queue using an array. 

Implement queue using a linked list. 

Implement circular queue using an array. 

Implement circular queue using a linked list. 

Implement binary tree using a linked list. 

Implement binary search tree using a linked list. 

Implement tree traversals using a linked list. 

Implement BFS using a linked list. 

Implement DFS using a linked list. 

Implement Linear Search. 

Implement Binary Search. 

Implement Bubble Sorting. 

Implement Selection Sorting. 

Implement Insertion Sorting. 


Note: The instructor may add, delete, or modify experiments as justified.
